Jesus called them
“serpents, offspring of vipers.”
Who is he talking about?
The Pharisees.
And who were they?
A prominent, Jewish religious sect
in the first century.
Why was Jesus so critical of them?
Because even though
those religious leaders had knowledge of God
and prided themselves on their
strict adherence to the Law of Moses,
they did not do as Moses had said
—to listen to the future Savior
that Jehovah would raise up for his people.
That Savior is Jesus Christ.
But when the Pharisees saw him
miraculously curing the sick, lame, and blind
—even resurrecting the dead—
they did not rejoice over that
and glorify God for what he
was performing through Christ.
The Pharisees were faithless,
and they refused to believe in
and listen to God’s Son.
Instead, they persecuted Jesus’ disciples
because they did put faith in the Christ.
So Jesus exposed the Pharisees
for what they were and called them “serpents”
because of the deadly spiritual harm
that they inflicted on others
who were influenced by them.
In fact, the Pharisees
exerted such great influence over the people
that prominent persons
were afraid to openly confess
their faith in Jesus
for fear of being expelled
from their positions in the synagogue
and losing face in the community.
Can the same sort of fear
hold people back today from serving Jehovah
as a disciple of God’s Son,
fearing the rejection or ridicule
that they might have to endure
from neighbors, friends, or family?
If it is, how can you
imitate Jesus’ disciples?
They not only knew about God
but they trusted in him
as their reliable Father and Friend.
As proof of that, they went right
onto the temple grounds in Jerusalem
in full view of everyone
and gave a bold witness about God’s Son.
They were powerful by their faith.
When the Jewish high court
—many members of which were Pharisees—
heard about this, they were furious.
They ordered the disciples
to stop teaching about Jesus.
What did they do?
Cower in fear?
No.
We can read what happened at Acts 5:29
—that’s Acts 5:29.
It reports:
“In answer Peter
and the other apostles said:
‘We must obey God as ruler rather than men.’”
Jesus’ disciples did not allow
the religious leaders’ pressure
and threats to deter them.
They knew their priorities
and that situations would arise
when a Christian cannot obey
both men and Jehovah God.
You see, human rulers forfeit
their right to our obedience
when they demand what Almighty God prohibits
or, as in this case,
when they prohibit what God requires of us.
Even if they ban our preaching work,
we cannot stop carrying out
our God-given assignment
to preach the good news.
So at that very moment,
the apostles set a precedent
for all true Christians throughout the ages
—to obey God as Ruler first.
The disciples’ faith made them
real friends of Jehovah.
As a result, today they are alive
and well in heaven with Jesus
to serve with him as kings and priests.
What of those faithless Pharisees
and their coveted prominence?
Jesus told them to their face
what fate lay ahead of them
as recorded at Matthew chapter 23
verse 33.
At Matthew 23:33,
he told them: “Serpents, offspring of vipers,
how will you flee
from the judgment of Gehenna?”
Now, “the judgment of Gehenna”
meant that if they did not change,
they would be everlastingly destroyed.
If we are going
to imitate the disciples’ faith,
we must do as Jesus urged his followers.
See what he said at Matthew 6:33
—Matthew 6:33:
“Keep on, then, seeking first
the Kingdom and his righteousness,
and all these other things
will be added to you.”
So Jesus’ disciples must always make
the Kingdom their first concern in life.
If we do that, then, as Jesus promised,
Jehovah will see to it
that we have the material
and spiritual necessities of life.
Now, ‘seeking the Kingdom’ first
in our life includes
‘preaching the good news of the Kingdom’
to as many people as we can.
As with Jesus’ disciples,
it requires courage and boldness
to preach when neighbors,
friends, or family oppose us.
But we do not need to fear them
or any other religious enemies
because Jesus taught his disciples
how to preach boldly but discreetly.
You can see this at Matthew chapter 10
and verse 16.
At Matthew 10:16,
he said: “Look! I am sending you out
as sheep among wolves;
“so prove yourselves cautious as serpents
and yet innocent as doves.”
It seems that most literal snakes
would rather flee than attack.
So to be cautious, here, means to be prudent,
sensible, shrewd.
Now, the dove is known
as “the sheep of the bird world”
because of its gentle appearance
and disposition.
So to be innocent means being blameless,
or genuine, with pure motives.
Jesus’ point was that when
his sheeplike disciples face persecution,
they need to combine
the characteristics of being cautious
and innocent to avoid possible dangers
as they carry out their preaching work.
For example,
suppose colleagues at work, schoolmates,
or even members
of your own family make caustic remarks
about your beliefs as a Witness of Jehovah.
Instead of responding in kind
by being equally sarcastic about their faith,
show them that their comments have no effect
on your peace and your pleasant demeanor.
That’s being prudent and blameless,
cautious yet innocent.
We all need to keep imitating
the faith of Jesus’ disciples.
Well, what have we learned
from this symposium?
Two things.
First, we must reject
the course of faithless ones
like Cain, Lamech,
Noah’s neighbors, Pharaoh, and the Pharisees.
Second, we need
to imitate Jehovah’s faithful servants
like Abel, Enoch, Noah,
Moses, and Jesus’ disciples.
If we do, then we can enjoy living forever
as a friend of Jehovah.